# StarCruiser — a roleplaying storygame of space adventure and panic fear

***Version 0.2.0, 3 August 2014 ***

**Game Design, Writing, Graphic Design**

Rob Alexander

**Playtesters, whose tears were not in vain**

Tim Kaine

Guy MacDonnell

Sam Simpson

James Smith

*StarCruiser* © Rob Alexander 2012-14, in part (GM agenda chapter and
description of Fronts) derived from *Dungeon World* © Sage LaTorra and
Adam Koebel 2012 (you can find that via the [official
website](http://www.dungeon-world.com/), or access a [free HTML
version](http://www.dungeonworldsrd.com/))

This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0
Unported License. To view a copy of this license, visit
<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/> or send a letter to
Creative Commons, 444 Castro Street, Suite 900, Mountain View,
California, 94041, USA.

Overview
========

**Tachyon Network Bulletin 2352.104.02.18-0648**

**SENDER:** Territorial Control Group

In the light of recent events, civilian shipping should avoid sectors
(9,4x), (9,4y) and (9,5x).

All shipping, including military vessels, should avoid sector (9,4y).

Yes, it has come back.

**END OF BULLETIN**

StarCruiser is a storygame of space adventure, character drama, and
infrequent panic fear. The stories you will tell are about starships
exploring the vastness of space, facing serious dangers, maybe building
something. These stories tend to involve quite a lot of death and loss,
a good number of alien worlds, and strange vistas that leave you feeling
quite peculiar. They are stories that intermingle threat, uncertainty
and hope. It is not a game for people who insist on being in control;
nor is it a game for people who like to revel in suffering and nihilism.

The Setting
-----------

StarCruiser provides an evocative setting, but not a canonical one; it
is designed to give you a feel, and some captivating ideas, but not to
constrain you.

In summary, StarCruiser is set in a late 24^th^ century in which some of
the promises of fiction have come true. Some, but not all. There is
disappointment as well.

There is interstellar travel, but a great many stars turn out to be
surrounded by dead rocks. Many aren’t even mineral-rich.

There are aliens, but they are almost without exception bizarre and
hostile. They don’t like us, and we certainly don’t like them.

We’ve unlocked our latent psychic powers… but a good end to a psychic’s
career is confinement in a padded room. A lead-lined padded room.

We *can* terraform worlds, but after a century of mediocre results the
dream is wearing thin.

Players and Characters
----------------------

One player is the GM. They control the overall flow of the game, and
makes a wide variety of judgements. Their judgements can be contested by
the group – if these contests make the game unfun, you have collectively
failed and should feel shame.

The other players are the character players. Each controls three
player-characters (PCs) – one a senior figure in the ship’s command
structure, the other two mid-ranking personnel. Over time these
characters will change – indeed, we expect them to change, because
casualty rates are not negligible – but each player always has 3 PCs,
one of which is more senior than the others.

Sequence of Play
----------------

At the start of each arc, the players agree the type of story they want
to play in: the fine detail of the region of space they will occupy, the
nature of the ship and its crew, and the characters that they will
(initially) play. This is a group activity, although it is followed by
time when the GM works alone to flesh out some details.

At the start of each session the group recaps the previous session, in
particular remember where it left off.

During a session, players take turns to frame scenes, starting with the
GM and moving clockwise around the seating area. On the first turn of a
session (only) the GM may give up their first scene and start the order
with the player of their choice; following that, play proceeds clockwise
from that player.

Typically, players use their scenes to pursue their characters’ goals,
to gather resources, and to help each other. Typically, the GM uses
their scene to fuck up the PCs’ goals and to introduce yet more
opposition and problems.

Characters
==========

**Tachyon Network Bulletin 2352.104.03.29-1531**

**SENDER:** Parapsychology Research Institute

**BLACK BORDER**

Ltnt John Soames, formerly a Psychology Officer serving with the
Frontier Fleet, is wanted by the PRA for interview and possible
containment.

Anyone with knowledge of his whereabouts should contact the PRA
immediately. If encountered, he should not be approached, excepting that
a clear shot opportunity should present itself.

**UPDATE 29-1921:** With reference to ‘shot opportunity’, above,
conventional weaponry may not prove effective. Creativity is advised.

**UPDATE 30-0435:** For those of you who knew Soames personally,
excessive thinking about him is not recommended. It may prove…
dangerous.

**END OF BULLETIN**

A character is name and a Tier.

A *viable* *player character* is an index card with a name, a Tier, and
at least one goal.

Tiers
-----

A 1^st^ Tier character has a position of power and responsibility, and
the capabilities to match. A typical 1^st^ Tier is in the top echelons
of the ship, but they could also be a character who is powerful but
outside the main structure e.g. union boss, alien ghetto leader, or a
political prisoner with a strong popular following.

A 2^nd^ Tier character has significant status (e.g. a mid-ranking
officer or respected NCO) but is not part of the inner circle. They take
orders more than they give them.

3^rd^ Tier characters are everyone else. They are the rank and file
personnel of the ship, the civilians of no particular note. Generally,
they have few skills and no notable Talent. A 3^rd^ Tier character is
not a viable PC. Rather than having a dramatic scene, they mop the floor
or drive a truck. They don’t even do that particularly well.

Characters can have in-fiction status beyond their tier. A 2^nd^ Tier
could be the ship’s Captain, for example, nominally outranking all
others. They probably won’t be that effective, however, in such a
high-status role.

Goals
-----

Beyond their name, the most important thing about a character is their
Goal or Goals. Goals define characters; characters are nothing without
their goals. Without individual character goals, the ship’s mission
would be fairly straightforward; with individual goals, it’s likely to
be a screaming clusterfuck of suffering and shattered dreams.

Having individual character goals thus makes for a better game.

Goals in StarCruiser follow a standard format (hard brackets \[\] denote
an optional part, the forward slash / denotes a choice:

*“I will &lt;arc-sized goal&gt; \[because &lt;because reason&gt;\];
first/next I will &lt;roughly session-sized goal&gt;”*

For example:

-   *“I will kill Sawyer Blake because he killed my husband. First, I
    will convince the Captain that we are most needed on Blake’s
    World.”*

-   *“I will establish a fair and just trading agreement between New
    Cyrus and Omicron I. First, I will show Lady Andromache that we are
    capable enforcers by bringing in a pirate crew.“*

The template can be flexed, but only do so knowingly. Goals that don’t
fit the template are often hard to play to.

Beyond the template, the following properties tend to make for good
goals:

-   Are concrete, and could be practically within in the scope of a
    single arc

-   Involve the owning PC with other PCs owned by other players

-   Represent something that the *player* (not the character) wants to
    feature heavily in play

-   Give you at least one idea of a scene you could frame to pursue them

Attributes
----------

Although not as important as goals, Attributes also serve to distinguish
characters from one another. The attributes are:

### Physical 

This covers any use of speed, power, coordination that doesn't fit under
another category. So it would apply to:

-   Flying a starship through an asteroid field

-   A foot race

-   Climbing a wall

-   Lifting a heavy object

-   Winning an arm-wrestle or tug-of-war

-   Perceiving a subtle sound or movement

-   Picking a pocket

-   Sneaking past a guard

### Martial

Martial covers most things in which the intent is to harm or
incapacitate or capture.

-   A fist fight

-   A wrestling match where skill as well as brute force and speed
    mattered (if not, that would come under Physical)

-   A gunfight

-   Leading a platoon into battle

-   Planning the logistics for a land war

-   Running the weapons systems on a starship

### Persona

Persona is your public face – the mask you wear most of the time. It
covers most social interaction and influence, at least the public and
visible kind. It includes an element of understanding large-scale social
patterns. More subtle and genuine interpersonal interactions are
mediated by Human instead.

-   Understand the tensions and power structures in a community or
    organization

-   Reorganize a ship’s crew to be more efficient

-   Rile a crowd into a mob with an inflammatory speech

-   Lie convincingly

-   Intimidate someone

-   Seduce someone, without love

(NB this is the *large-scale* skill for building social capital, but to
build a genuinely stable community you’ll need multiple people doing
small-scale Human rolls as well.)

### Human

This is your real self – the person behind the mask (flawed and
contradictory as it may be). This attribute is not just about conscious
intent (*wanting* to be real, to be empathetic, to be trustworthy) – it
covers empathy and the ability to be real. Insofar as Persona is the
large (which is not *all* that it is), this is the small – the personal,
the subtle the intimate.

-   Heal psychological or emotional damage

-   Stand out in a crowd of alien imposters

-   Resist an attempt to persuade you to do selfish and something
    harmful to other humans

### Work

Work covers anything that is everyday manual or technical work. It
includes routine engineering and technical tasks, and managing and
coordinating the same. It also covers disciplined, organised behaviour –
being consistent, sticking to approved procedures.

-   Running a home

-   Flying a starship very efficiently for a week

-   Keeping a ship’s engines running

-   Building a sealed environment on an uninhabitable world

-   Upgrading a ship’s drive with new thrusters

-   Living off the land in a wilderness

-   Heal ordinary physical wounds (not the most serious ones – that’s
    under Knowledge)

-   Remembering to close a security door behind you

### Knowledge

This covers knowing obscure or specialist things. It takes over when
Work fails – when the task becomes unusually obscure or creative.

-   Heal very severe wounds (of any type)

-   Know about how a given alien culture works

-   Discover the function of an alien device

-   Impress a learned crowd with your mastery of the philosophical canon

Roles
-----

Beyond their attributes each character has at least one *Role* – a
description of what the character is most skilled at. Roles are free
text traits, and the range is nominally infinite – players propose, and
the other players approve (or reject, or refine and tweak). Examples of
roles include: Starship Captain, Starship Pilot, Marine Commander,
Marine, Starship Engineer, Terraforming Engineer, Xenobotanist,
Political Agitator, Confidence Trickster, Industrial Spy, Community
Organiser, Preacher…

A good role is something that you do that gives you expertise – it’s not
just something unskilled (e.g. “idle layabout”) or something that
happens to you (e.g. “scientific test subject”). Although “make a career
of it” roles are possible e.g. “professional stowaway”.

At time of character creation, each Role should be agreed with the whole
group so that everyone understands what each role entails, and has some
idea of idea of what it *doesn’t* cover.

A role defines the domain in which a character’s attributes can be most
usefully be applied. Actions that require specialist knowledge or
skills, but which are within the scope of the role are conducted using
the full normal value of the relevant attribute. Such specialist actions
that are only tangentially related to the scope of the role are taken at
-1D, and those out of its scope entirely are taken at -2D.

Many actions do not require specialist actions or skills – they are the
kind of thing that most normal adult character (of a suitable culture
and tech level) can do. Examples at TL2 include driving a car, using
normal smartphone or computer apps, doing mathematics to high-school
level, and growing simple plants. These actions should not, generally,
involve penalties for being out of role.

Characters get one role for free; the 2^nd^ and later roles must be
bought as talents.

Talents
-------

Talents describe very specialised skills and abilities within and beyond
the general abilities captured by attributes and the broad competencies
captured by roles. Talents vary in their potency – this is captured of a
point value, which determines to cost to buy them (at character
creation, or between sessions).

1 pt – enable general competency in specialist area

-   Psychic Potential (requires further talents to become useful – see
    “Psychic Talents”, below)

-   General-purpose cybernetic link

2 pt – enable abilities beyond normal human capability

-   Cybernetic merge with a powerful entity (e.g. to a combat vehicle or
    a ship’s navigation and security system)

-   (certain powerful psychic powers)

OR

-   Add an additional role, so that an additional set of actions
    (potentially, as much again) now counts as in-role

3 pt – enable very powerful non-normal abilities

-   Vacuum native – character is not (is no longer) organic in any
    sense, and does not rely on conventional life support (air, heat,
    food and water) to survive and function

-   (certain very powerful psychic powers)

### Negative Talents

What about “negative talents” i.e. things that are specialised
disabilities (e.g. agoraphobia or having a mortal enemy)? These are not
talents as such, and taking them does not gain your character any
points. Where these are interesting then you’ll naturally get screen
time and better scenes in compensation for them; where they are not,
they are better not taken.

To get points in compensation for generic disabilities (e.g. limited
movement), reduce related Attributes (in that example, Physical and
perhaps Martial).

### Psychic Talents

Some special rules apply to Psychic Talents. To start with, the
character must have the 1pt Talent “Psychic Potential”. They must then
buy further Talents to enable actual abilities, at a base cost of 1pt or
as shown:

-   Telepathy – communicate with others; perceive their hidden thoughts

-   Psychic perception – perceive the state of the world that is hidden,
    including past events that have left little or no mundane trace

-   Prescience – predict the future (predict deterministic events; gain
    bonus dice for uncertain ones)

-   Telekinesis – move objects without touching them

-   Transformation (2pt) – change, enhance or regenerate your own body

-   Teleportation (3pt) – move your body through space

PCs may spend additional points to gain bonuses when using psychic
talents – a talent at 1 above its base cost gives +1D on all rolls using
it, a talent at 2 above gives +2D.

**Important special rule:** The 1 pt cost for Psychic Potential counts
towards the character’s point cap as usual, but the specific talents *do
not* – psychics can indeed exceed normal human potential. This has side
effects, however – Table 1 explains how a characters total points in
psychic talents (including the 1 pt for Psychic Potential) leads to
unpleasantness.

Table 1 - Psychic
Side Effects

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Total Points**   **Symptoms**
  ------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  0                  None

  1-3                Voices, strange sensations.
                     
                     +1D to resist psychic influences from human sources, -1D to resist psychic influence from alien sources.

  4-5                Visual hallucinations.
                     
                     “Poltergeist” activity.
                     
                     Voices become discernibly attached to vaguely comprehensible entities which provide information (wanted or not) and make requests (reasonable or otherwise).
                     
                     Resistance modifiers from the previous level become +/- 2D
                     
                     All Human rolls for ordinary (non-psychic) interactions suffer a -1D penalty.

  6-7                Psychic is perceptibly changed – anyone observing them knows that they are beyond human. Their speech has changed, their thought patterns are bizarre… just being near them *feels* strange.
                     
                     All Human rolls for ordinary (non-psychic) interactions suffer a -2D penalty; all Persona rolls for ordinary influence suffer -1D.
                     
                     Blackouts – between any two scenes (but not more than once per player-scene-cycle) the GM may have the character enact a scene’s worth of activities known only to them.

  8+                 Psychic leaves the human world. The player must set a goal that will take the PC out of play, and enact that goal successfully in the following game session[^1]. Otherwise, the PC becomes an NPC under GM control (and continues to pursue that goal).
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Handling psychic blackouts:** By default, the PC (and the players)
only know that there was a blackout if it leaves evidence (e.g. the PC
comes round on the planet’s surface rather than the ship, or finds that
their hands are muddy and torn from where they’ve been digging something
up). Otherwise, inferring that a blackout occurred is a Difficulty 2
Human roll.

> **Design Note** Psychics are designed to burn brightly, and then burn
> out. They’re deliberately “built fragile” assuming the 3-character
> model.

What are the entities that talk, demand and control? It’s not fully
understood, but they seem to be localised in space to one or a few star
systems.

### Using Psychic Talents

Rolls to use psychic talents are based on the attribute that would be
used had the task been attempted by mundane means – Physical to
manipulate objects, Knowledge to learn information about an item.

Some specific cases:

-   Detect that another character is has some psychic talent – opposed
    Human roll

-   Infer the total number of psychic points that another character has
    – opposed Human roll with a +1D modifier for them

-   Hold a conversation with a character telepathically, where that
    character has Telepathy themselves – automatic success

-   Hold a conversation with a character telepathically, where that
    character *does not have* Telepathy themselves – Difficulty 2 Human
    roll

-   Read the surface thoughts of an (unwilling) other – Persona vs
    Human, with a base +1D bonus to the target

-   Manipulate an object by telekinesis – Physical roll at a -1D penalty
    compared to performing the equivalent task by hand; additional -1D
    if the object is of non-trivial mass (say, over a kilo)

Equipment
---------

StarCruiser is not a game about tracking possessions. Anything unique
and special to you is a Talent. (I’m thinking cybernetic implants here –
something someone else can’t just take and use. At least something that
is kept under lock and key. In your quarters.) Anything else is part of
the ship. Establish who’s got it when you need it.

> **Design Note** Characters in StarCruiser are meant to be simple –
> that’s what makes the it practical to have three PCs per player, and
> the ship as well. If PCs were as complex as those in Burning Wheel or
> D&D 3E, the game would be unmanageable for most players.

### Money and Wealth

StarCruiser assumes a command economy, so control of resources falls
under Persona (to get access to them) or Work (to know how to deploy
them usefully).

Players with Multiple Characters in One Scene
---------------------------------------------

A character may appear in scenes as and when appropriate. However, in
any given scene each player has their focus on only *one* of their
characters, even if more than one of them is present. Only the focus
character may take game-mechanical actions, such as performing tests
(see below) or helping others in tests.

Tests and Contests
------------------

The most basic mechanic is the “test” – a player rolls a number of dice
equal to the value of their character’s most relevant attribute, counts
each die as a success or failure, and compares the number of successes
to a pre-set target number (“target”) or to the roll of an opposing
character. The higher number is the winner.

*On any die, 1-3 is a failure, 4-6 is a success. 6’s explode – they
count as a success, then you roll an extra die, which may give you
another success, or indeed explode again.*

When I say “a character”, I might mean a person, I might mean a ship.
Ships are people too, sort of, at least insofar as they use the same
basic mechanics.

You don’t just make the roll, then work out what the attribute to be
rolled is, and then say what it means. All parties involved (usually,
one player and the GM) agree before the roll what attribute will be
rolled and what the stakes are: what (in general terms) will be the
consequence of failure and the consequence of success. No dice go down
until those facts are agreed.

> **Design Note:** In case you missed it, this is a stakes-setting game.
> Set stakes, every time, or it won’t work right.

Some actions will be opposed – one character versus another. Those are
*con*tests – the winner is the one with the highest total. As normal,
the skills and consequences are agreed before either character rolls.

If a standard test roll exceeds the obstacle, then the character
succeeds. If a standard test roll equals the obstacle, then the
character succeeds but with a cost – the agreed success comes true, but
so does part of the failure consequence.

If two characters in a contest roll the same, then it goes to a tiebreak
– they roll a single die and the higher is the winner. If they tie
again, re-roll again, ad nauseam if necessary. There are no ties in
StarCruiser – they are unseemly in the modern future.

NPCs never make unopposed rolls, and NPCs never dice against each other
– no player, no roll. In all events that involve NPCs only, the GM
decides the result. They should bear in mind a small amount of
plausibility and a large amount of dramatic value. This is a heavy
burden, true, but the alternatives are worse.

After a conflict is resolved, the result stands. Players of Burning
Wheel may recognise this as *Let it Ride* – once a test or contest
determines a result, no new roll can be made for it until circumstances
radically change.

> *Example:* Captain Stern leads an infantry assault on The Unbreachable
> Fortress of Stars. She fails. Under this rule, she cannot try a second
> time. Massive reinforcements, yes, an experimental and dangerous
> weapon, yes. Otherwise she must find another way around.
>
> **Play Advice:** This rule may lead to odd situations, where you
> cannot explain why the character cannot “just try again”. It is
> intentionally dramatic, not realistic. It falls to the group to
> rationalise these cases.

### Setting Difficulties

For unopposed tests, set a difficulty number based on how difficult the
task is. As a general rule, a difficulty *x* task will require roughly
2*x* dice to have a 70% chance of succeeding, or 2X-1 dice to have a 60%
chance.

So, a difficulty 1 task is fairly easy. Most generally-competent people
(2^nd^ tiers and up) will succeed most of the time.

A difficulty 2 task is challenging. An expert in that area (attribute
value 4) will succeed most of the time, but others will often fail.

A difficulty 3 task is hard. Only a skill 5 character will succeed most
of the time without a net positive modifier.

Table 2 gives probabilities of success for common combinations of dice
and difficulty. (‘-‘ means less than 1%).

[]Table 2 - Test Probabilities

  ----------------------------------------------------
  **Diff -->**   **1**   **2**   **3**   **4**   **5**
                                               
  **Dice**                                    
  ------------ ------- ------- ------- ------- -------
  **1**        50      8       1       -       -

  **2**        75      33      9       2       -

  **3**        88      56      25      8       2

  **4**        94      73      43      20      7

  **5**        97      84      60      34      16

  **6**        99      91      73      50      28

  **7**        99      95      83      63      41
  ----------------------------------------------------

### Impossible Tests

Characters may not attempt tests under the following circumstances:

-   They do not have the tools that are absolutely required for the job

    -   E.g. repairing a TL2+ vehicle engine using only a combat knife

-   The task is very specialized, and they do not have even the basic
    training and experience that is required

    -   E.g. a non-engineer trying to repair a TL3+ spacecraft engine
        (even with books etc)

The GM is the primary arbiter of when these circumstances hold. It is,
of course, expected that the group will comment on and judge this. And,
in line with their principles (*“Ask questions, use the answers?”*), the
GM should often ask players if their PC has relevant history (*“So,
Johan, ever tried to steer anything like this before?”*)

### Assigning Modifiers

While difficulties capture how hard the task is for *anyone*, modifiers
can capture how hard the task is for *this guy, right now*. Modifiers
change the number of dice rolled – they are added to the attribute value
before you pick up the dice. Modifiers are assigned by the GM, using
their judgement, from the standard modifier set as follows:

-   +1D if the situation is particularly advantageous (a head start, a
    long time to think, a distraction for the people you’re trying to
    fool)

-   -1D if the task is specialised and tangential to the character’s
    role(s) (e.g. a shuttle pilot takes the helm of a capital ship)

-   -2D if the task is specialised and well outside the character’s
    role(s)

-   +1D for unusually good equipment (but not for equipment that is
    needed to attempt the task at all)

-   -1D for marginal, inadequate equipment

-   +1D or +2D if the player spends Fate Points on this test (see later)

-   +1D if the character has Help from another (see later)

In an opposed roll, the following also applies:

-   +1D if the contest depends heavily on equipment (weapons, vehicles,
    computers) and one character has equipment of a higher tech level
    than the other (this can be +2D if there is a two-or-more difference
    in equipment tech levels – manual irrigation versus terraforming)

As a general rule, a given test may involve bonuses from all of the
categories, but only one bonus per category.

*All of those modifiers can be reversed.* If the situation is bad, -1D’s
can be applied for the same reasons. Fate Points are the exception –
they are always positive.

### Help

One character may help another with a contest. To do this, they make a
roll against an appropriate obstacle assigned by the GM. If they
succeed, they give the helped character +1D, if they fail, they give
-1D. The circumstances must be such that their help makes sense on the
timescale of the main task – building a brick wall is not a sensible
task to help with a firefight, and air-dropping propaganda leaflets
can’t help you *during* an argument.

A helping role is not quite a normal test – there are no stakes (except
for the +1/-1 die result) and no fallout (see later) is applied.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ***Physical***                                           ***Mental***                                                                                                ***Social***
  -------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Normal**                                               (as physical, but penalties apply in the mental domain, i.e. where a sharp, clear, steady mind is needed)   (as physical, but penalties apply in the social domain, i.e. where a good reputation or strong self-confidence is needed)
                                                                                                                                                                       
  1 No lasting effect                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                       
  2-5 Injury                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                       
  6 Incapacitated                                                                                                                                                      

  **Lethal**                                               (as physical, with caveats as above)                                                                        (as physical, with caveats as above)
                                                                                                                                                                       
  1 Injury                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                       
  2-3 Incapacitated                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                       
  4-6 Killed (just like that. No save)                                                                                                                                 

  []Table 3 - Effects of Fallout                                                                                                               
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

A character may receive help (or hindrance, should the dice roll badly)
from up to three characters per test.

Fallout – Suffering and Injury
------------------------------

Failed tests often hurt. This is part of the stakes – “if you fail, you
will take fallout” This is the norm – certainly, most *contests* should
involve fallout for the loser, although normally this will be of a
non-lethal type – they are tired from fruitless exertion, confused and
frustrated by their inability to crack that code, embarrassed and
disheartened by the utter failure of the crowd to respond to them. The
GM declares as part of the stakes whether and what fallout is on the
cards (if they forget until after the dice go down, normal fallout
should be applied).

If lethal force is involved (a gun, a devastating emotional blow (e.g.
using your knowledge of a character’s guilty past), a campaign to smear
someone as an alien sympathiser, then the loser always takes fallout and
that fallout is of lethal type.

In opposed tests, fallout can be asymmetrical – with my fists against
your gun, you’re risking normal fallout but I risk lethal.

Fallout comes in three domains (physical, mental and social) and two
levels (normal, lethal). If the domain of fallout due from a conflict is
not obvious (e.g. as it is in a gunfight or a smear campaign), it should
be agreed explicitly before the dice are rolled.

The effects of fallout are determined by rolling a D6 against the
appropriate box in Table 3. Yes, they are nasty. Space is a nasty place.

NPCs never take fallout – their fate is either part of the intent of a
test (“If you succeed, she’ll lose all confidence in her ability to
command.”) or adjudicated by the GM.

Penalties for fallout effects:

-   Injured: -1D on all relevant tests

-   Incapacitated: -3D on all relevant tests

Fallout applies its particular domain only. For example, physical
fallout would impair jumping over a barrier but not solving a maths
problem.

Fallout in two domains compounds – a physically injured character takes
a mental injury, they are at -1D to all physical and mental tasks until
they recover.

Fallout in the same domain *replaces* previous fallout, resetting any
healing or recovery effects. E.g. if an injured character receives an
incapacitation in the same domain, they are incapacitated. If a
character who has an injury that’s been treated or healed (see later)
suffers another injury in the same domain, then the treatment or healing
effects are removed. The exception here is when a failed healing roll
has made things worse – the injury remains at the worse level.

A physically killed character is literally dead. A mentally “killed”
character is irredeemably insane or incompetent – they can no longer
take meaningful actions towards intelligible goals. A socially “killed”
character is an irredeemable pariah from here to Proxima Centauri –
nobody cares about their achievements, purely because they’re *that
asshole’s* achievements, and everyone hopes that they die.

Regardless of type, mechanically speaking death is death – that
character can never again be under player control. They character sheet
goes in the graveyard, and the player must replace them.

Should circumstances allow some kind of bizarre resurrection or
rehabilitation, then the character may reappear as a PC – but only under
the control of a different player. Mechanically, such a returning
character should be created from scratch using the normal rules.

### Treating Fallout

Fallout is relatively easy to *treat* (remove or reduce the penalty) but
more difficult to *heal* (remove the underlying damage).

Treating an injury is normally a difficulty 2 Work test (a specialised
task for a medical doctor or equivalent in other domains). If
successful, the injury penalty is removed; the injury nominally remains
until healed, but this has no mechanical effect.

Treating an incapacitation is normally a difficulty 3 Knowledge test
(specialist for a surgeon or equivalent – a more specialised role than
for treating an injury). If successful, the penalty is reduced to -1D.

The consequence of failure on a treatment roll is always that the
treatment fails, and no further treatment can succeed. No (further)
fallout is ever caused by to a treatment roll (on either party).

### Healing Fallout

With basic medical care (or equivalent), an injury takes a week to heal;
incapacitation takes six weeks to heal down to injured. Good medical
care (or equivalent) will halve those times. This does not normally
require a roll, but it does require appropriate facilities and
personnel. With no medical care at all, injuries heal in *three* weaks,
incapacitation does not heal at all.

Injuries in different domains heal in parallel, and require separate
care to speed them up.

A character may attempt to accelerate the healing of another PC by
attempting a relevant task (e.g. surgery for a physical injury). This
can, at best, halve the recovery time. Failure always has the
consequence of doubling the recovery time. Regardless of result, only
one healing attempt can be made per character per injury. No (further)
fallout is ever called by a healing roll (on either party).

As noted above, death cannot be recovered from.

Fate Points
-----------

Players have Fate Points (FP); characters do not. It is only characters,
however, that can benefit from them. Prior to any roll, a player may
spend one FP to give their character a +1D in that test or contest, or
spend three FP to give their character +2D.

When FP are spent on a roll where negative modifiers are also applied,
the minimum number of dice rolled is equal to the number of dice from
FP, and the dice are always normal dice (succeed on 4+ rather than 6
only). For example, if the attribute rolled is 2, there is a -3D penalty
and 1 FP is spent, the player rolls 1 normal die. If then spent 3 FP,
they would roll 2 normal dice.

At the start of an arc, every player has 2 FP. After that, FP are
awarded at the end of each session – one to each who meets any of the
following conditions (maximum one per condition per player, except as
noted):

-   *Progress* – They made significant progress towards one of their
    characters’ goals, and that character survived the session (one
    allowed per *character*)

-   *Good Trouble* – They pursued one of their characters goals in a way
    that caused exciting trouble and strife

-   *And No-One Heard them Scream* – They had a character die in a way
    that the other players found poignant, funny or actually quite
    disturbing

-   *Light in the Blackness* – They did something in-character that was
    genuinely moral, heroic or otherwise admirable (something that made
    the other players feel *elevated*)

In addition, *if there are three or more character players*, the whole
group (including the GM) votes for the following awards, which are worth
1 FP each. (The GM cannot receive them, and you may not vote for
yourself. You may vote for “nobody” i.e. vote that you don’t think
anyone has earned them this time)

-   *Crewmember of the Session* – for the player who did most to develop
    the emerging story in an interesting way (this may or may not be
    contiguous with the ship’s actual *mission*)

-   *Method Actor* – for the player who best inhabited one of their
    characters, and made them (if only briefly) seem real

If there are only one or two character players, they receive 1 FP each
unless they unanimously agree that they sucked this session in both the
above respects.

> **Design Note** The FP award rules matter because they’re the only way
> to get FP, yes, but they also matter because they implicitly make the
> group ask *“This session, did we do what we’re meant to be doing in
> this game?”*.\
> \
> If you want to hack StarCruiser to have a different feel and tone,
> changing these will probably help with that.

Roleplaying Notes
-----------------

There’s a box on each character card labelled “Roleplaying”. That’s for
a few notes, keywords really, for when you forget who Ltnt Craves
actually is. (It turns out he’s *“Taciturn, bitter, calls injustice when
he sees it”.*) They have no mechanical significance.

This is especially useful when a player is missing and you have to act
for his 2^nd^-tier whom you can’t remember much about and never liked
anyway.

Experience and Change
---------------------

In general, StarCruiser characters do not improve. 1^st^ Tier characters
are at the top of their game, and 2^nd^ Tier characters are competent
for their level and role. The exception is when a 1^st^ Tier dies and a
2^nd^ Tier is promoted in their stead – the 2^nd^ Tier will slowly grow
to 2^nd^ Tier status.

Change and growth are achieved by experience points (XP), which are
given out at a fixed rate of 1 to each player at the end of each
session.

XP can be spent to increase the attributes of a character who is 1^st^
Tier but has an attribute total of less than 20. 1 XP per attribute
point; the attribute may not end up over 5.

XP can also be used to change characters – they can be spent to move
attribute points – 1 XP per point moved.

XP can be spent to buy talents – 1 XP per talent point. As with
attributes, this may not take the character over the point limit for
their tier (with one exception – psychic talents, other than the basic
Psychic Potential talent, do not count towards the limit).

> **Design Note** 1^st^ Tiers are, mechanically, pretty static – their
> stats change over time, but they don’t improve as such. 2^nd^ Tiers
> can literally improve, but only by dead man’s shoes.

Players may also spend XP to improve the ship and its crew. This may be
a wise choice, as ships tend to last longer than characters do. See the
*Ships* chapter.

People Die
----------

Characters die. It’s not that uncommon. They are shot up by things,
eaten by things, and forcibly incorporated into things. Characters also
go mad, go off on their own to look for unrelated things, or go off into
things and are never seen again.

If a 1^st^ Tier character is removed from play, the player promotes a
2^nd^ to take their place. This must be one of their own current pair.

If a 2^nd^ Tier character is removed from play, or is promoted to 1^st^,
the player creates a new one to take their place **or** accepts one from
another player (who then creates a new 2^nd^ Tier).

> **Design Note** PC death comes easier in StarCruiser than many games.
> This is viable because players have multiple PCs, because players are
> encouraged to link their PCs to common goals, and because the ship
> provides a context and mission that ties the surviving PCs together.
> Characters die, but the ship rolls on.

A corollary of the above: don’t get obsessed with your 1^st^ Tier. Give
your 2^nd^ Tiers some earnest attention, and they may blossom in ways
that surprise you.

> **Play Advice** Make yourself a little graveyard or shrine for the
> character cards of the dead. I recommend an airtight food storage box,
> as it provides a kind of gruesome hygiene. At the end of the arc, have
> a little ceremony for them. Maybe light a candle and recite their
> names. It’s what they would have wanted.
>
> If you’re playing multiple linked arcs, you might want to have
> sections in the graveyard. “Dead”, “Gone Away”, “Not a Person Any
> More”. That kind of thing, anyway; it jogs the memory.

When a Player is Missing
------------------------

When a player is missing, other players may act for their characters.
There are limitations, however, which should be generally heeded:

1.  A -1D penalty applies to all their tests.

2.  That player may not earn FP for any reason.

3.  The player receives no XP for the session

4.  That player may not be referred to by name.

It is possible that as a result of such a session-sans-owner a character
may end up dead, mauled, or permanently weird. Such is life; the player
has two more PCs, no?

> **Design Note** Limitation 4 is there to diminish the salience of the
> missing player (who, after all, is not there and does not need the
> attention), thereby keeping your attention on the characters and the
> world.

**\
**

**\
**

 {#section-1 .ListParagraph}

Ships
=====

**Tachyon Network Bulletin 2352.104.02.12-1937**

**SENDER:** Federation Naval Yards (Mars Orbit)

We have a reconditioned T-Class that is surplus to current security
requirements. Got some permanent structural damage, (very) old-fashioned
core ducting, and a hydroponic garden in place of the third plasma
battery, but otherwise good to go.

Bids, please.

**END OF BULLETIN**

Ship Goals
----------

The most important feature of a ship is its goal. The goal defines the
shared mission and that unites the PCs, for better or worse.

A ship has only a single goal, but given its importance in the long term
it’s worth splitting it into two parts. The first part gives the
long-term goal; the second part gives the next step towards that.
Examples:

-   *“We will find Earth; first, we will find the lion-shaped nebula.”*

-   *“We will shut down the pirate operations in this sector; first, we
    will track the Explicit Lyrics back to its home port.”*

-   *“We will discover what the aliens want with us; first, we will find
    out who among the crew is one of them.”*

Ship Ratings & Features
-----------------------

Ships have “ratings” rather than attributes. Mechanically, they fulfil a
similar role to character attributes, but are different in that they are
never rolled – they merely modify character rolls.

Similarly to Ratings, ships have “Features” which are analogous to
Talents.

### Ratings

All ships have a value (which may be anything from 0 to 5) in each of
several Ratings. In most cases, a rating of 0 does not mean “no
capability in that area” , but it *does* mean negligible capability, a
bare minimum. A ship with 0-rated crew has a skeleton staff of
minimally-skilled and barely-motivated people. A ship with 0-rated cargo
probably has some storage space, but not enough to trade any bulk good
in financially-interesting volumes.

For standard (unopposed) tests which rely heavily on ship capabilities
or performance, the following typical modifiers should be applied:

  1     -1D
  ----- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  2     0
  3-4   +1D
  5     +2D *if* it’s going to be a really big feature of what you’re trying to do (otherwise still only +1D)

For versus tests, a ship with 1 or 2 points better than the other grants
+1D and a ship with 3 or more points better grants +2D.

The Ratings are as follows:

#### Speed

This covers manoeuvrability, straight-line thrust and general
power-to-mass ratio.

#### Stealth

This represents the ability of the ship not to be seen – low EM
signature, passive rather than active sensors, and perhaps a little
hardware to disrupt active sensor pings.

#### Cargo

This is mostly cargo *capacity*, but it also broadly covers the
provisional of specialist storage facilities – temperature-controlled,
radiation sealed, or high-security.

#### Sensors

Sensors are the eyes and ears of the ship. This captures power and
accuracy under normal conditions; the ability to sense without in turn
being sensed (i.e. the ratio of passive to active sensing) falls under
Stealth.

#### Science

Science labs, on-board research databases (even when you’re in T-band
contact, the bandwidth is far too low to support even the 20^th^-century
internet), and scientists on the crew. All helps when there are things
to be identified, things to be understood, things to be modified.

#### Engineering 

When things go wrong, when there’s a fire, when the ship needs to be
jury-rigged for a special purpose, you need to good engineering teams,
spare parts, and the right equipment. This covers that.

#### Firepower

The power to deal damage - number of guns, size of guns, number and
quality of fire directors, capacity of battle computers.

#### Resilience

There are no shields to raise (not at TL4, anyway), but there can be
thick armour, redundant layers of armour, point defence guns, and a
superstructure that can hold the ship together under strain.

#### Crew

This combines the size and quality of the crew.

### Features

Features make ships unique in the same way that Talents make characters
unique. For example, “Marines” might be a feature that gives a Crew
bonus when the crew is being used to fight. As with Talents and Skills,
Features are generally narrower in scope than Ratings.

The most basic form of a feature is like the Marines example above – it
provides a +1 rating bonus in a given narrow situation.

1 pt – enable competency in specialist area…

-   Orbital assault (land marines on a planet from orbit against TL2+
    antiaircraft fire[^2])

(NB the inclusion of a specialist area in the list above implies that
ships are not generally well-equipped for that. Without that feature,
ships attempting tasks in that area suffer a penalty of -2D.)

…or provide a +2D bonus under a restricted set of situations…

-   Spinal mount weapon - +2D firepower against a target that has an
    effective Speed rating lower than you[^3]

-   Ample leisure facilities - +2D when using leave and leisure time as
    a means to resolve crew issues

-   Extensive family quarters (most of the crew have family with them -
    the ship is a large village in space) - +2D on social actions that
    appeal to a sense of community

2 pt – enable abilities that normal ships cannot attempt at all

-   Colony ship – you have the supplies and equipment to found an
    immediately viable colony on a broadly habitable world, or a
    marginal colony on an airless world

3 pt – enable very powerful non-normal abilities

-   Alien stardrive – you are not slaved to jump points, only to
    distance (10-15 LY per jump)

### Relating Ship Ratings to Real-World Measures

The ratings system is intentionally abstract, and I’ve never made a
serious attempt to relate it systematically real-world properties. This
is possible, of course. E.g. I’ve landed on a convention that a Crew 3
ship probably has about 200 crew.

Fallout for Ships
-----------------

Like characters, ships have damage states, and these mirror the
character ones pretty closely. They only have, however, one damage
category, not three.

The damage states are:

-   Healthy

-   Damaged

-   Crippled

-   Hulked

-   Destroyed

Penalties for fallout effects:

-   Damaged: -1 on all ratings

-   Crippled: -3 on all ratings

-   Hulked: total loss of function, except perhaps localised emergency
    life support. The ship is dead in space.

Fallout from losing a potentially harmful conflict is determined by
rolling a D6 on Table 4.

[[]]Table 4
[]- Fallout for Ships

  ---------------------
  ***Ship Fallout***
  ---------------------
  **Normal**
  
  1 No lasting effect
  
  2-5 Damaged
  
  6 Crippled

  **Lethal**
  
  1-3 Damaged
  
  4 Crippled
  
  5 Hulked
  
  6 Destroyed
  ---------------------

### The Crew Survives

*"The T-class don't explode, Sir. A fire might clean her out, like, but
she won't explode."*

The player's ship may be destroyed, but PCs always get a chance to
evacuate, even when the circumstances are quite heavily set against
this. Typically, this should involve a single difficulty 3 test per
character. This could be reduced to difficulty 2 if they were already in
an advantageous position (e.g. in a shuttle bay) or increased if e.g.
they pre-committed to staying with the ship until the last minute in
order to gain a bonus (e.g. while attempting a last ditch rescue or
recovery).

### The Ship is Tough

*"The dual superstructure of the T-Class allows it to survive impacts
that would split another ship in two..."* - T-Class Engineering manual

The player's ship once-per-lifetime gets a special saving throw to avoid
being Hulked. Roll a die – on a 3+, the ship is merely Damaged, not
Hulked.

Once this throw is made, regardless of the result, the ship gains the
permanent status "Permanent Structural Damage" (PSD).

If the saving throw fails, it is Hulked *and* gets the PSD tag.

Spending XP on Ships
--------------------

Players may spend XP to improve the ship or its crew. Improving a rating
costs XP equal to the new value. Ratings may not normally exceed 5.
Buying new features costs their point value. No ship may exceed a total
point value (ratings + features) of 40.

Players may pay XP towards an upgrade that they cannot afford the whole
of yet (e.g. paying the 1 XP they have towards a 3pt feature). This has
no game-mechanical effect, but acts as an indication of that players
commitment to completing that upgrade, which may encourage other players
to do the same.

> **Design Note** Yes, those XP costs are very high. But this is ok,
> because all the players can contribute, and because (by design) the
> ship tends to last much longer than the individual characters that
> they could spend XP on instead.

### Justifying Changes to Ratings and Features

One of the basic conceits of StarCruiser is that the T-class is modular
– part of the reason for its ubiquity is the ease with which it can be
adapted to a particular mission. Normally this takes place in drydock,
but even in the blackness of space radical work is sometimes possible.
Any change to a ship Skill or Feature should be narrated in those terms
– ideally, someone should keep a permanent record of what the does to
warrant its values.

For example, an increase to Crew might represent better standard
training, a new structure to the hierarchy, or increased confidence by
the crew in the command staff. Alternatively, it could just represent
additional crew quarters built from cargo containers and lashing onto
the sides of the engineering deck.

Similarly, an increase in Science could be narrated by acquisition of
better sensors, building more elaborate lab space, or (while in orbit of
a civilised planet) persuading a Professor of Xenobiology to join the
crew and bring their research team with them.

Generally, play fast and loose with these justifications. If the group
wants to justify a Crew upgrade on the basis of a ship-wide training
regime that they’ve been working on for months, and they can pay the XP
for a crew increase, then that’s fine.

> **Design Note** The above paragraph reiterates a general theme of
> StarCruiser – the mechanics, especially the ship mechanics, are quite
> abstract. The mechanics give results (or values that will give rise to
> certain patterns of results), and it’s then the job of the group to
> make sense of them in the fiction. If the first proposed explanation
> is completely implausible (e.g. a large crew expansion in the depths
> of space) then the group needs to play with it until it does make
> sense.
>
> To a large extent, *this is the game*. StarCruiser is a game of
> telling stories using a dramatic engine. It is not a fiction-first
> roleplaying game.

### What if We Upgrade the Ship In-Game, but Don’t Pay the XP?

This is the flipside of the previous heading. If you upgrade the ship
but have no XP to pay for the upgrade, the upgrade doesn’t work yet.
There are technical glitches, the new crewmembers don’t gel and routines
break down. When you finally pay the XP, everything comes together.

Getting a New Ship
------------------

In the rare case that the player’s ship is destroyed, they can replace
it. But this is rather like a 2^nd^ Tier being promoted – the new ships
starts off substandard, and only eventually grows to the glory of a full
player ship.

A replacement ship must be found (built, bought or stolen) in-game, and
once this has been achieved the players may assign its ratings. This is
done in the same way as creating the starting ship (points are split
between the players, who then take it in turn…), but the pool is only 20
points.

Sequence of Play
================

**Tachyon Network Bulletin 2352.104.04.05-0052**

**SENDER:** Space Science Authority

Do not sample Red Oil. Repeat, do not sample Red Oil.

**END OF BULLETIN**

At the Beginning of an Arc
--------------------------

Follow the process described in the chapter “Starting a New Game”.

The Beginning of the Session
----------------------------

1.  Recap the previous session

2.  Establish where each PC was at the end of the session

3.  The GM frames the first scene (or nominates a player to do so)

During the Session
------------------

As described earlier in the book, players (including the GM) take it in
turn to frame scenes.

### Framing Scenes

As noted in the introduction, players take it in turn to frame scenes,
starting with the GM (who may give up their scene and nominate someone
else) and then proceeding clockwise around the players.

While it’s normally good for the GM to use their scene to introduce new
problems and to bring up new opposition, this isn’t a hard rule. Early
in the arc, late in the arc, or after a major crisis they may want to
take the pressure off a bit. They can even have a GM scene that
introduces a new ally or some extra resources.

> **Design Note** StarCruiser relies on the GM to set the tone, and make
> a lot of pacing decisions, via what they do with their scenes.

Normally, players should frame scenes that contain at least one of their
own characters. They may, however, propose scenes that *do not* include
any character of theirs. These are subject to the approval of the
players controlling the characters who *are* in the scene.

Normally, scenes involve at least one player character. The GM can frame
scenes with no PCs in them, e.g. to illustrate the actions of an NPC
which the PCs could not perceive. Players cannot frame scenes without at
least one PC.

Players should feel free to frame scenes that are very brief, perhaps
taking half a minute of real time, just to illustrate their character.
This can be a good solution when the player in question doesn’t have
anything dramatic they want to do right now. Such scenes are commonly
called “colour scenes”.

While framing a scene (describing the starting conditions) the framing
player has narrative/directorial control. Once the scene starts,
however, (i.e. any once any actions or dialog has happened), normal
rules apply and only the GM has control of anything beyond PC actions.

### Ending Scenes

It’s the GM’s job to keep an eye on the flow of scenes, and to prompt to
cut them. Ending a scene at just the right time can be very powerful.
Letting a scene drag on beyond its interestingness can be quite
draining.

### Ending the Session

The session ends when the players agree it does. We recommend that you
keep sessions in the range of 2-3 hours. In StarCruiser, when played as
designed, that will cover a large span of game time and a great many
game events.

You should always keep back ten minutes after the end of the session
proper to do the end of session activities. Failure to do this, or
rushing this, may lead to a breakdown of the game’s reward system (the
way that fate points support players for doing things that make the game
interesting) and the game’s flag system (the way that character goals
allow players to say what they want the game to be about).

End of the Session
------------------

1.  Award FP based on the session’s events

2.  Award each player 1 XP

3.  Allow players to spend XP to improve the ship

4.  Allow players to spend XP to change and/or advance their character’s
    stats

5.  Allow players to change their characters goals (as they see fit)

6.  Allow the players to collectively agree changes to the ship’s goal

Between Sessions
----------------

This section describes what the GM is expected to do between sessions,
in the form of explicit instructions for lightweight preparation.

> **Design Note** This process is designed to take no more than an hour
> per session – often less. Taking longer than this is explicitly
> discouraged – it’s not the GM’s job to make the whole game work. A key
> skill in sustainable GMing is preparing only as much as is highly
> effective – no more. Developing this skill (and teaching it to others)
> is more valuable to the hobby than pouring your soul into endless prep
> work – no matter how good the results.

The process here uses the “Fronts” approach pioneered by Apocalypse
World and refined by its various clones, in particular Dungeon World.
Advice on making good fronts can be found in both of those texts; the
latter is free online. The steps below spell out a specific order of
between-session work, and give some advice specific to StarCruiser.

### Prune fronts

Prune your fronts – remove spent ones (and spent threats within fronts).

### If needed, make new fronts

Gather up things that threaten the PCs, or characters that the PCs care
about, or characters and things that it is the duty of the PCs to
safeguard (e.g. because they’re a Navy ship and Naval Command has tasked
them to protect them). Capture those threats in fronts.

-   Use the Future box to summarize what will happen eventually if the
    PCs don’t intervene (or do so ineffectually).

-   Use the Stakes boxes to write down a few questions about what you, .
    Commit to only answering those questions through play (rather than
    in your prep).

-   Use the Cast list to capture the main NPCs involved in the Front,
    and their stats (as advised in the “After the Arc is Defined” rules
    in Chapter 5. If they are important enough to constitute a threat,
    put their name and goal in a Threat box.

-   Use the threat Counts to capture how the threats will progress their
    plans/impulses if the PCs don’t intervene.

Aim to have, at the start of any given session (apart from the first),
at least two, preferably three threats that are in position to impinge
on the PCs in their current situation. After all, it’s to this that you
will look when you need something new to hit the PCs with.

Don’t forget that the PC ship is a front. Every good game involves
trouble “at home” as well as out there.

### Advance existing fronts

Look at each front, and see if you can expand it. Have any of the counts
progressed during play? Might some of them progressed offscreen, i.e.
while the players have been ignoring them? Some hints:

-   How have NPCs advanced their goals?

-   How have NPCs changed their plans (e.g. after being thwarted by PC
    action)?

-   Have any NPCs had a glimpse of some new opportunity or object that
    they could make their new goal to attain?

-   Have any new NPCs appeared on the scene?

-   Are any about to?

-   Have any planets (or their populations) changed?

-   How are they about to change?

Aim for each front to have at least one active threat (otherwise, it’s
dormant).

It’s worth reviewing your stakes questions at this stage, too, to see if
any have been answered. If so, think about asking some more.

### Think of opportunities for the PCs

StarCruiser, by its nature, can get quite oppressive and one-sided – the
ship is haunted, the crew have the plague, and Dr Cleve has turned the
planet the ship was protecting into a factory world staffed by
lobotomised slaves. It’s therefore worth keeping a few ideas on hand for
how you could give the PCs a helping hand, either by something they
could acquire or by something an NPC could do to help them.

The Opportunities box on the Session Prep sheet is for this.

### Check each player has something in your prep

On the Session Prep sheet, list the PCs, grouping them by player.
Summarise the current goal of each PC in the second column. Then, for
each, check your prep to see if you have an interesting threat or
opportunity for them. If you do, note it in the third column (or at
least put a tick there).

You don’t need something for every PC, but I’d suggest you aim to
satisfy at least two PCs per player.

At the End of an Arc
--------------------

*Suspend Animation –* Write down, at least in note form, the final state
of the ship, characters and wider setting. This will make it easier for
you to have a sequel at a later date.

Also gather up the character and ship sheets and store them safely,
alongside the above notes.

*Say the names of the dead* – take it in turns to take a random
character from the graveyard and say their name, role on the ship, how
they died, and what you (as a *player*) think of who they were.

*Reflect on the game –* hold a brief post-mortem for the game itself –
what went well, what wasn’t so good, and what the top three things are
that you’d do differently next game around (be that StarCruiser or
something else).

**\
**

Starting a New Game
===================

**Tachyon Network Bulletin 2352.104.02.12-1937**

**SENDER:** Federation Exploratory Control

The Meridian-Class Survey Cruiser *Elliptical Curve* left will shortly
be leaving TNET coverage on a five-year mission to seek out new life and
new civilisations.

We wish them the best of luck and a steady wind, and we look forward to
the stories they’ll have to tell if they return.

**END OF BULLETIN**

Defining an Arc
---------------

Starting an arc involves several things to be created, defined or
agreed. There’s no set order for this – most likely which can be carried
out in several iterations as you collectively home in on the game you
want to play.

The GM has a major role in all this, as it will define the game that
they will be running, but it is designed to be a collective effort
between all the players.

> **Play Advice:** To help prompt players with new characters, gather a
> large set (dozens or hundreds) of genre-suitable character portraits,
> distributed by diversity characteristics you seek in the game (gender,
> ethnicity, age…). Whenever a player is about to create a character,
> have them pick three portraits sight unseen, then choose one from
> those and create the character based on that.

### 1 Agree an Arc Concept

If this is the first arc with this ship and crew, you’ll need to decide
what they’re about. Who are you?

*A survey mission? A raiding party? Refugees from a doomed world?*

### 2 Sketch One Character Each

Each player should sketch one of the three characters that they will
play in the game. They don’t need to come up with many details, just a
general concept.

> **Play Advice:** Unlike most RPGs, every player has three characters.
> So if one character proves to be unpleasant, uncooperative, or
> otherwise a collective problem – the other PCs can deal with them. If
> they push them out of an airlock, that’s bad for them, but the owning
> player has two more characters.

### 3 Describe the ship

What is your ship (and what was it supposed to be)?

*A colony ship? A capital warship? A bulk ore carrier?*

### 4 Sketch another Character Each

While doing this, think briefly about 1^st^ versus 2^nd^ Tier, and about
relationships between the characters.

### 5 Sketch the Play Area

Agree a geographical domain for the arc – the region of space in which
the action will happen. Play *could* drift outside this area, but both
GM and players should agree

We recommend a single map sector, containing 5-10 star systems, as the
default. This is something manageable.

### 6 Who else is Out There?

Who are your (actual or potential) allies?

Who are your enemies?

As ever, the GM should ask follow on questions whenever they might be
interesting or fruitful. (GM principle – “Ask questions, use the
answers”)

### 7 Agree the Play Area and Draw a Cluster Map

Draw a map of the cluster on a single large sheet (avoid very large
paper sizes unless you have a very big table). For each system:

-   Give it a name

-   Discuss its general features and role within the cluster, at least
    the publicly known version of it

-   Capture the discussion results by writing three short free-text
    sheets for each system, ideally right there on the star map

-   Mark its known jump connections to other systems

-   Consider marking it an Amber Zone (travel not advised) or Red Zone
    (travel prohibited). Aim for one each per cluster.

> Draw some jump links (or similar) out of the cluster, and mark on the
> shared map roughly where they go (“populated space”, “fringe worlds”,
> etc)

### 8 Set the Ship Goal

The players should agree on the ship’s goal.

### 9 Sketch a Third (and final) Character Each

### 10 Check each Player’s Character Set

The set of three each player has at this stage must have the following
properties:

-   At least two genders

-   At least two real-world ethnic groups

-   At least two characters who are substantially different in age

-   At least two characters are highly driven and will naturally do
    things in play that follow their individual goals

-   At least one character whose goals fit awkwardly or not at all with
    the ship’s goal

### 11 Fill in Stats and a Goal for All Characters

Follow the “Making a Character” process, below.

### 12 Have Each Player Swap One Character

Each player is allowed to create three characters, but they do not get
to keep all of them. They must put one of their 2^nd^-tiers up for
“adoption” by another randomly chosen player (the character is fully
created before the receiving player is known).

Once each player has chosen what character they will give up, roll 1D.
On a 4+ the abandoned characters go to the player on their creator’s
left; on a 3-, they go to the right.

Receiving players should clarify the character’s goal, because it may
have made sense (in terms of agreed facts about the game world) to the
creating player, but not be obvious to the receiver. The receiver may
find it useful to re-write the goal in their own words, but this should
be to the satisfaction of the creating player – the character has been
created and now they are real!

### 13 (Optional) Draw a Relationship Map Including all the PCs

### 14 Stat Up the Ship

See “Making a Ship”, later in this chapter.

### 15 Introduce the Characters

They take it in turns to briefly introduce their characters, their
relationships with the other PCs and the ship.

Making a Ship
-------------

### The Quick-Play Version

If you want to get started quickly, better to concentrate on the
characters and just take a generic ship. A factory-spec T-Class has the
following Ratings:

  --------------------------------
  **T-Class Starcruiser – **
  
  **Factory Spec**
  ---------------------------- ---
  Speed                        3

  Stealth                      2

  Cargo                        2

  Sensors                      3

  Science                      2

  Engineering                  4

  Firepower                    4

  Resilience                   4

  Crew                         3
  --------------------------------

### Designing a Ship

If you have more time, you can design the ship as a group. Ships start
with a 0 rating in Firepower, Science and Cargo, and 1 in all the
others.

The players then receive 21 points *between them* to split between the
ratings – these are split between the players equally, with the player
with the darkest eyes taking any leftover points.

e.g. if there are four players, the player with the darkest eyes
receives 6 points, the other three 5 each.

The players take it in turn to spend single points on the ship until
everyone has spent all their points. 1 point spent buys 1 point in a
rating. No rating may end more than 5.

### The Class Name

StarCruiser is written with the assumption of the T-Class Cruiser, and
indeed this is printed on the default ship sheet. It’s a modular design,
often extensively customized, so almost any set of ratings can be
justified.

That said, if the resulting set of ratings is a long way from the
default T-Class described above, you might want to give your ship a
different class name that better captures the concept - perhaps an
H-class Freighter (very high Cargo) or a Meridian-class Survey Ship
(very high Science).

Making a Character
------------------

### Can I Play an Alien or an AI?

By default, this is discouraged. But… with the whole group’s permission,
there is potential for both.

> **Play Advice:** I would suggest a maximum of one non-human character
> PC at any time.

### Attributes

For a 1^st^ tier, split 20 points between the attributes. No attribute
may be higher than 5, or lower than 1.

For a 2^nd^ tier, split 16 points.

(For reference, a 3^rd^ tier character would get 12 points, giving them
an average of 2 in each attribute. This is the human norm.)

### Role

Choose a role that can be described in 1-3 words, and discuss briefly
with the rest of the group what the role entails (and perhaps what it
doesn’t cover). Be willing to change the words if others don’t feel that
they capture what you mean.

### Talents

Talents cost points – the same points that attributes cost. Having one
or more Talents will therefore reduce that character’s attributes
compared to their Talentless peers.

### Goals

Choose one goal per character.

After the Arc is Defined
------------------------

Once the above is completed, it’s time for the GM to go away and make
some preparations for the first actual play session.

Normally, this process should take around two hours. If this is
inconvenient, in that the players want to run a normal session straight
after arc definition, then the GM can do just the first few steps as
marked, normally in around ten minutes.

1.  Start a cluster sheet for the cluster. Fill in the names of the
    systems.

2.  Come up with two or three secret traits for each system, things that
    are not generally known. Write them down on the cluster sheet.

3.  Sketch one NPC per system (metaphorically, the “ambassador” for that
    system – work on the assumption that the players will think of this
    character first when they think of the people in that system). Just
    give them a name and a role (e.g. “violent, sanctimonious dictator”)
    at this stage.

For the short-prep version, stop here. Carry on after the first session.
If you have longer, do the following steps as well.

1.  Sketch one NPC per player (minimum of three) who are on board the
    player’s ship – “target” at least one at each player.

    a.  The targeted NPCs could be rivals, enemies, or helpers. (This is
        a good opportunity to flesh out the roles players have sketched,
        e.g. the ship’s Captain could have an NPC assistant who’s pretty
        loyal)

2.  Flesh out the NPCs you’ve developed

    a.  List all their attributes that aren’t of value 2. Name their
        Role(s) and list their Talents (if any).

    b.  Sketch their appearance and mannerisms (the “X but Y” trick[^4]
        is useful here)

    c.  Give them a clear, concrete goal (preferably one that is
        relevant to at least one PC – this could be common ground or put
        them at loggerheads)

    d.  (For ambassadors, particularly likely antagonists, don’t be
        afraid to use 1^st^-tier or even higher-point builds. For ship
        crew or likely player allies, however, try to keep to 2^nd^-tier
        stats – more, and they risk overshadowing the PCs.)

By all means make a few more notes on ideas as you come up with them,
but that should basically be it for your systematic prep. Any more risks
lumbering you with prep that will get in the way of fluid response to
the players. Spend any extra time or energy learning to improvise
better, immersing yourself in the genre, or just getting out in the
world (metaphorically or physically) so you’ve got a broader range of
experiences to draw on in the flow of the game. Read fiction, watch
fiction, play games. Read other related rpgs (and storygames, and their
supplements). Or go online and discuss an idea you have for the game, or
a problem you’ve been having with the rules.

### What Makes a Good Arc Setup?

One word: *threat*. A good starting situation is either full of obvious
threats to the player ship (and to things that matter to its goals), or
is apparently safe but full of active *hidden* threats. Both kinds of
threats should have well-defined agendas and goals; both kinds of
threats should be powerful enough to be very dangerous (in one way, or
another); both kinds of threats should be in a position such that if the
players do nothing to stop them they will achieve their aims, and in
doing so substantially change the cluster for the worse (in the eyes of
the ship’s and the PC’s goals).

A few things to check, after arc prep:

-   If the PCs do nothing, will terrible things soon happen (from the
    perspective of their goals and the ship’s goal)?

-   If the PCs stick around but do nothing (or are careless and
    ineffective), will terrible things happen *to them*?

-   If the PCs are proactive, are there plausible things that the PCs
    can do to change the overall outcome?

    -   NB this doesn’t have to mean “stop it from happening”, merely
        move it significantly in the direction of their goals

In StarCruiser, jumping in here was *always* a bad idea. The PCs just
don’t, necessarily, know it yet.

The Role of the GM
==================

**Tachyon Network MULTICAST 2352.104.05.03-1426-5a**

**SENDER:** Zero Point Command

**R-PATTERN:** TCG, NVY, SSA-E

**BLACK BORDER**

All space combat units pull out of Capella. Repeat, all combat units
withdraw from the Capella system. Rendezvous at Beta Aurigae, count your
dead. You’ve all fucked up. Again.

Fortunately for you, we got this.

**END OF MESSAGE**

Unlike many other modern games, the GM’s role in StarCruiser is fairly
open-ended. They are constrained by the rules in many ways, including
the scene economy, but within scenes they have substantial latitude and
responsibility.

That said, the GM is *not* wholly responsible for the progress of the
game, particularly its progress at the level of scene-to-scene and
beyond. That is the responsibility of the whole group, with the
expectation of significant help from these rules.

No Rule Zero
------------

These rules don’t assume that the GM has authority to arbitrarily change
or ignore rules. The group as a whole has that authority (how could it
not?) but if it hands it all over to one person, that’s its choice and
its problem; it is not the requirement or expectation of these rules.

> **Design Note** The flipside of this: these rules are built to be
> followed, and to provide a viable game when they (all) are. As the
> author, this is how I play.

The GM’s Agenda
---------------

While playing StarCruiser, the GM has the following agenda. They do not
have any other (mandated) role.

-   Portray a galaxy full of wonder and terror

-   Fill the character's lives with trouble

-   Play to find out what happens

Everything you say and do at the table (and away from the table, too)
exists to accomplish these three goals and no others. Things that aren’t
on this list aren’t your goals. You’re not trying to beat the players or
test their ability to solve complex traps. You’re not here to let the
players explore your finely crafted setting. You’re not trying to kill
the players (though the Scourge of Betelgeuse might be). You’re
certainly not here to tell everyone a pre-planned story.

Your first agenda is to **portray a galaxy full of wonder and terror**.
StarCruiser is all about voyages to unknown stars, conflict over goals,
and humankind alone and mostly water against terrible things in the
blackness of space that are mostly teeth and eyes and disembodied
thoughts. It’s about men and women who are some combination of brave,
naïve and marginally-informed risking their lives and sanity for the
hope of well, something. Show the players this universe, and encourage
them to react to it.

**Filling the characters’ lives with trouble** means working with the
players to create a world that’s engaging and dynamic. Present threats,
present opportunity, and throw them at the players.

The most important part of the agenda is **play to find out what
happens**. Your preparation for StarCruiser sessions should **never**
presume player actions. If you do, the rules will fight you – the
scene-framing alone will let the players wreak havoc on your plans.

A StarCruiser game is about a setting in motion – a place with entities
great and small pursuing their own goals. You’ll plan out, yes, what
will happen if the PCs don’t get involved – but once they do that plan
is at the mercy of their choices. Your job is to honestly and creatively
improvise how the setting and its entities responds to what the PCs do.

The GM’s Principles
-------------------

Whereas the GM’s Agenda tells them what they should be doing, their
Principles guide them in achieving that. They are pragmatic principles,
rather than moral ones, although some of the GMs who violate them are
indeed terrible people.

### Show mysteries at every turn

Punctuate your descriptions of places, people and things with surprising
features that suggest promise and threat beyond the immediate concerns
and directions of the players. This steady stream of mystery and
weirdness will colour the player’s experience of the StarCruiser setting
in a subtle but pervasive way.

### Hold Your Assets Lightly

The game universe exists to support the game that plays out; it has no
other purpose. The colonists in the asteroids, the theocracy on that
verdant planet, even that entire star system with its intricate
android-corrupted politics – they all exist solely to support the game.
If it’s exciting, interesting or simply dangerous for it to implode,
explode, or change in an unsettling and ultimately destructive way, then
make that happen.

Put another way – the PCs and their experiences matter; the imagined
universe itself doesn’t matter. After the arc ends, the players will
remember what happened; the NPCs you created won’t.

### Give Every Entity a Goal

If it thinks, it wants something. If it feels, it “wants” something.
What is it?

### Ask Questions, Use the Answers

As GM, you don’t need to know everything about the universe. If you
don’t know something or you don’t have an idea, ask the players and use
what they say.

The simplest question is “What do you do?” After you describe something
happening, or finish an NPC speech, ask an affected player “What do you
do?”

If you don’t know who the Chair of the Space Science Foundation is, or
what she’s like, ask the player who controls the chief science officer.

If you don’t know whether a given PC has ever met an alien before, ask
their player. Be sure to follow up with “And how did that work out?”

### Reward the characters’ work, but not always, and be sure to complicate it 

Let the PCs achieve things. Certainly don’t stymie them at every turn.
Let their schemes progress, but *complicate them*. Shooting kills
cyborgs, but destabilises the reactor. Raising a mob lets them storm the
governor’s office, but draws the wrath of the governor’s alien
manipulators. Patching in the experimental hyperdrive frees them from
the tyranny of jump points, but now and again it takes them where *it*
wants to go.

Now and then, have one of their actions succeed in a great and
uncomplicated way. Particularly do this when it obviously steamrolls
over what you, as the GM, have been assuming (or hoping) will happen.
This will help the players realise that they can achieve things, and
keep them believing that through tough times when nothing seems to be
working out.

### Care about the Characters

The PCs are the protagonists of the story. Think of them like the main
characters in a TV drama; cheer for their victories and lament their
defeats. You’re not here to push them in any particular direction,
merely to participate in fiction that features them and their actions.
The whole rest of the universe, along with all the NPCs, is subordinate
to that aim.

### Maintain technology consistency, but let the players innovate

The technology model is meant as a creative constraint, and as something
that establishes a baseline of what’s possible within which PCs (and
NPCs) can plan. Many of the TL5 technologies, which are *not* generally
available, radically change what is possible and what actions make
sense: teleportation is one of these. Some (most notably human-level AI)
have such radical implications for human society that they would
naturally dominate the game. Let the players work freely up to TL4, but
keep TL5 on a shorter leash.

### Think Off-screen Too

Often, PCs do things and the consequences are obvious. Other times,
however, they should do things and see should happen. The GM may smile,
and write something in their notes, but say nothing. That’s fine.

The Role of the Players
=======================

**Tachyon Network Bulletin 2352.104.04.05-1816**

**SENDER:** Father Noah Landmarke, Mental Hygiene Foundation

In the darkness of space, you can feel very alone. And being cooped up
in a little tin can in a great big vacuum doesn’t necessarily bring you
any closer together. So remember, folks, that you’re going to need to
work to get along. After all, the rest of the crew are people too.

Well, most of them are.

**END OF BULLETIN**

The Players’ Agenda
-------------------

Just like the GM, the players in StarCruiser have a defined role to
play. You can mix in other things (you’re freer than the GM in this
respect), but the game is designed to do work when you do mostly the
following:

-   Make your characters vivid and real

-   Put your characters in situations that test them

-   Play to find out who your characters are

**Making your characters vivid and real** means giving them
comprehensible motivations, plausible emotions, and above all a sense
that there is a person there under the persona.

**Putting your characters in situations that test them** is best
achieved by pursuing their goals in the face of adversity, and in the
face of conflict between their goals, the goals of the other PCs, and
the goal of the ship.

To **find out who your characters are**, don’t plan a “plot arc” for
your character, and don’t have a fixed idea of how they’ll develop. Just
play them in the game, making the decisions that seem best, and they’ll
*show* you who they are.

The Players’ Principles
-----------------------

### Set clear goals and pursue them aggressively

### ... but respect the other players, as *players*

You can play rough with their individual characters, as long as you
remember that those characters are their only way to interact with the
game.

### Learn the rules, work with the rules

The rules aren’t complex (relative to other roleplaying games), but
they’re rigid for a reason – they’re a balancing tool to help all
players have a share of control. Learn them and respect them.

*Do* note problems, do propose solutions, but understand that when
you’re doing so you’re doing game design (and that’s hard to do well).

### Frame the scenes that you want to see happen

Character goals are a way to say what you want the game to be about, on
a per-session and longer basis; the scene framing mechanic is a way to
say what you want the game to be about *right now*.

### Learn the technology model, negotiate the boundaries of the model, work within the model

StarCruiser’s fixed technology model is a necessary evil. When a
question of technology comes up in fantasy, historical and modern-world
games, you can lean on players’ common knowledge about the real world.
In a science fiction game, that’s not sufficient – players need to know
how technology has advanced since our time.

You should become broadly familiar with the tech levels described in
Appendix A. You can certainly introduce new technology, particularly
during arc setup but also in scene framing. If in doubt, do this by
asking the GM is such-and-such is possible and if you have one – it’s
part of the GM’s job to keep tech consistency.

### React to what happens; don't plan too much

How much is "too much"? That's something you'll have to work out. It’s a
skill.

### Take risks, both with your characters and with your creative contributions

Yes, this can be painful (the latter particularly). But the alternative
is a dull game.

### Advocate for your characters (fight their corner)

### ... but be prepared to see them fail – often badly, sometimes terminally

### Build on other player's contributions 

(and don't forget that the GM is a player, too)

### Provide a foil for other player's characters

Characters don’t mean much in a vacuum – they need contrast in order to
be visible. Help the other players by having your PCs take contrasting
roles – be the weak to their strong, the rigid to their flexible, and
the confused to their resolute.

In particular - make sure you talk to the other players! Frame scenes
(and take actions) such that your PCs interact with other’s PCs, not
just with your own.

### Tell the other *players* everything, and listen to everything, firewall that knowledge from your characters…

Don’t keep secrets – not between yourself and another player, not
between yourself and the GM. Do everything out in the open.

### … but use that knowledge for better play

Use things you know, but your PCs don’t, to enhance drama. Walk them
blindly into the trap that you know is there. Have them say things that
show they don’t understand quite how bad things are.

 {#section-6 .ListParagraph}

Design Notes and Hacking Advice
===============================

**Tachyon Network Bulletin 2352.104.05.11-1102**

**SENDER:** Mental Hygiene Foundation

No man is an island.\
\~ John Donne\
(Earth, 16-17C)

**END OF BULLETIN**

Design Goals
------------

When working on the rules and text for StarCruiser, I keep a set of
goals in mind. These say that the game should:

-   Support space adventures where the PCs travel between worlds and
    encounter strange and terrible things (in the vein of media like Dr
    Who, Battlestar Galactica, and Event Horizon) in a frightening but
    *hopeful* universe

-   Support "play to find out what happens" on a player-driven basis,
    with the GM having lots of fun things to do and only a modest extra
    responsibility compared to the other players

-   Support players doing mature, adult and important things with
    organisations and communities and emotions. Capture the reality that
    human emotions, social currents and cultures matter, and are not
    easily changed but are at the same time are not wholly chaotic and
    unknowable.

-   Be compatible with adult life: it is easy to manage and learn, is
    well-suited to video conference play, and is optimally played in
    arcs of 4-10 three-hour sessions. It works well with GM + 2 players,
    optimally with GM + 3.

You’ll have to be the judge of how well the game fulfils those goals.

New Player Setting Briefing
===========================

Where and When Are We?
----------------------

It’s 2352. Mankind have colonized space, met aliens, had wars. The
universe is vast, but sparsely populated because there are few habitable
worlds. Most places you could go are just rocks; at best, rocks with
artificial habitats sheltering a few hundred people.

One day, we’ll have terraformed all of this. Only we’ve been saying that
for nearly two hundred years, and it’s wearing a bit thin.

There are aliens, but they are almost without exception bizarre,
hostile, and well, alien. They don’t like us, and we certainly don’t
like them.

We’ve unlocked our latent psychic powers… but a good end to a psychic’s
career is accommodation in a (lead-lined) padded room.

Who Are We?
-----------

You are the crew of a T-Class star cruiser, charged to (or committed to)
do whatever you agreed you would do.

What Does This Look Like?
-------------------------

See the pictures in the book (if you have the version with pictures,
which only exists as a single printout), or look at my online Pinterest
boards (<http://www.pinterest.com/alexander1382/starcruiser-mood-board/>
and <http://www.pinterest.com/alexander1382/starcruiser-key-pictures/>).

If that’s not enough: white plastic, big switches, flashing lights.
Starship exteriors like 1970s book covers, computer screens like the
mid-80s, clothes from the 90s, starship interiors like Peter Davison era
Dr Who.

Ships fire lasers that you can see. There’s a lot of rainbow-coloured
glow around.

Questions & Answers
-------------------

### Is this a Hard Science Setting?

No (see the next few answers).

### Explosions in Space?

Yes.

### Faster Than Light Travel

Yes.

### Faster Than Light Comms

Yes... but it’s flakey – video comms might take you an hour to sync the
channel, and then only be stable for two or three minutes. Email/text
messaging is fairly reliable as long as you stay within a few LY of a
tachyon relay.

### Does the Ship Need Fuel?

Most power supply (include sub-light-speed flight if you’re using Tech
Level 3+ reactionless engines, which you are) is provided by fusion
reactors which run on hydrogen and are incredibly efficient. Most large
ships have around 3 months hydrogen endurance, and more can be scraped
from the atmospheres of gas giants.

Jump travel requires more than that – to generate the enormous energy
pulses requires antipositron annihilation. Antipositrons are expensive –
manufacturing them requires vast (planetside) particle accelerators and
enormous energy input. They’re bulky, too, their tiny mass dwarfed by
the bulky containment devices they require.

Typical starships carry antipositron cells for 3-6 jumps.

### Sentient Aliens

Yes. But they’re *nasty*, or at least hated.

### Sentient Aliens *Among Us?*

You should hope not.

### Sentient Computers and Androids

No. That didn’t work out. Seems like minds are for meat, and meat alone.
At least not until Tech Level 5, when a great deal changes.

Appendix A – Technology Levels {#appendix-a-technology-levels .ListParagraph}
==============================

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  TL   Name            What do they have?
  ---- --------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  0    Primitive       (**reference point Europe circa 1400**)
                       
                       Horses, metalworking, bows, cannon, agriculture, medium-scale construction, sailing ships

  1    Industrial      (**reference point Western Europe circa 1900**)
                       
                       Steam engines, aircraft, combustion engine, electricity, radio and telephone, efficient firearms (e.g. rifled barrels), indirect fire artillery, surgery, antisepsis, sewers, germ theory (that, paired with sewerage, enables useful public health measures), printing press, vaccination, calculus

  2    Information     (**reference point Western Europe circa 1988**)
                       
                       Computers, miniaturized electronics, computer networks, orbital rockets, satellites, nuclear power and weapons, antibiotics, industrial-scale mechanised agriculture, organ transplants, jet aircraft, armoured fighting vehicles

  3    Spacefaring     Fusion power, reactionless thrust, basic genetic engineering (enhance or reduce traits, eliminate many genetic diseases, clone lifeforms), directed energy weapons, animal-level AI, cryonic suspended animation, sealed colonies on airless or otherwise hostile worlds, crude nerve-computer interfaces, regenerative medicine (regrow lost limbs and organs), self-sufficient arcologies

  4    Starfaring      **Default level for player civilisation (and dominant civilisation, if different)**
                       
                       Jump drive, gravity control (so artificial gravity aboard starships, and sustained acceleration safe beyond \~3G), advanced genetic engineering (design new species), terraforming (within strict constraints), (limited) technological editing of living minds, effective nerve-computer interfaces (feels like a part of you), psychic screening and training, plasma weapons, (low-bandwidth) tachyon comms

  5    Hyperadvanced   **One or more of:**
                       
                       -   AI to human level (and beyond)
                       
                       -   Bioarchitecture (create new lifeforms from non-carbon substrates)
                       
                       -   Teleportation
                       
                       -   (limited) time manipulation (e.g. stasis field)
                       
                       -   Force fields
                       
                       -   Jump point manipulation (creation, destruction)
                       
                       -   Arbitrary terraforming
                       
                       -   Planetary architecture (construct ringworld, Dyson Sphere etc)
                       
                       -   Zero-point power and weapons
                       
                       -   Manipulation of consciousness (e.g. transfer subjective consciousness into another body)
                       

  6    Transcendent    Everything from TL5, perfected, and all the (incomprehensible) implications of a perfect synthesis of all that
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1]: As XP can only be spent between sessions, this text assumes that
    the PC has crossed the “8+ points” threshold between sessions, so
    there is one whole session in which they can achieve this goal.

[^2]: This is a typical tech-mediated situation – you need TL2 to
    meaningfully oppose an orbital assault, but if that’s all you’ve got
    then a TL4 attacker would get a +2D tech bonus that would compensate
    for the lack of this Feature.

[^3]: Which, of course, includes all space stations.

[^4]: <http://bankuei.wordpress.com/2014/01/12/improvising-npcs-x-but-y/>
